site/downloads/avatica-go.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: Avatica Go Client Downloads
permalink: /downloads/avatica-go.html
---

<!--
{% comment %}
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
The ASF licenses this file to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0
(the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
{% endcomment %}
-->

## Source releases

Release          | Date       | Commit   | Download
:--------------- | :--------- | :------- | :-------
{% for post in site.categories.release %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% if post.component != "avatica-go" %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% continue %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% endif %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% if post.fullVersion %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% assign v = post.fullVersion %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% else %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% capture v %}apache-calcite-avatica-go-{{ post.version }}{% endcapture %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% capture f %}apache-calcite-avatica-go-src-{{ post.version }}{% endcapture %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% endif %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% if forloop.index0 < 1 %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% capture p %}http://www.apache.org/dyn/closer.lua?filename=calcite/{{ v }}{% endcapture %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% assign q = "&action=download" %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% assign d = "https://www.apache.org/dist" %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% else %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% capture p %}http://archive.apache.org/dist/calcite/{{ v }}{% endcapture %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% assign q = "" %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% assign d = "https://archive.apache.org/dist" %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% endif %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% capture d1 %}{{ post.date | date: "%F"}}{% endcapture %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% capture d2 %}2017-05-01{% endcapture %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% capture d3 %}2018-03-01{% endcapture %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% capture d4 %}2018-06-01{% endcapture %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% capture d5 %}2018-09-11{% endcapture %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% if d1 > d3 %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% assign digest = "sha256" %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% elsif d1 > d2 %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% assign digest = "mds" %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% else %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% assign digest = "md5" %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% endif %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/docs/history.html#{{ post.tag }}">{{ post.version }}</a>{% comment %}
{% endcomment %} | {{ post.date | date_to_string }}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %} | <a href="https://github.com/apache/calcite-avatica-go/commit/{{ post.sha }}">{{ post.sha }}</a>{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% if d1 < d5 %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %} | <a href="{{ p }}/{{ f }}.tar.gz{{ q }}">tar</a>{% comment %}
{% endcomment %} (<a href="{{ d }}/calcite/{{ v }}/{{ f }}.tar.gz.{{ digest }}">{{ digest }}</a>{% comment %}
{% endcomment %} <a href="{{ d }}/calcite/{{ v }}/{{ f }}.tar.gz.asc">pgp</a>){% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% else %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %} | <a href="{{ p }}/{{ v }}-src.tar.gz{{ q }}">tar</a>{% comment %}
{% endcomment %} (<a href="{{ d }}/calcite/{{ v }}/{{ v }}-src.tar.gz.{{ digest }}">{{ digest }}</a>{% comment %}
{% endcomment %} <a href="{{ d }}/calcite/{{ v }}/{{ v }}-src.tar.gz.asc">pgp</a>){% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% endif %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% if d1 < d4 %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %} {% raw %}<br>{% endraw %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %} <a href="{{ p }}/{{ f }}.zip{{ q }}">zip</a>{% comment %}
{% endcomment %} (<a href="{{ d }}/calcite/{{ v }}/{{ f }}.zip.{{ digest }}">{{ digest }}</a>{% comment %}
{% endcomment %} <a href="{{ d }}/calcite/{{ v }}/{{ f }}.zip.asc">pgp</a>){% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% endif %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}
{% endfor %}

Choose a source distribution in either *tar* or *zip* format,
and [verify](http://www.apache.org/dyn/closer.cgi#verify)
using the corresponding *pgp* signature (using the committer file in
[KEYS](http://www.apache.org/dist/calcite/KEYS)).
If you cannot do that, use the *sha256* hash file (*md5* in older
releases) to check that the download has completed OK.

For fast downloads, current source distributions are hosted on mirror servers;
older source distributions are in the
[archive](http://archive.apache.org/dist/calcite/).
If a download from a mirror fails, retry, and the second download will likely
succeed.

For security, hash and signature files are always hosted at
[Apache](https://www.apache.org/dist).

Commit message:

[CALCITE-2574] Update download pages to include instructions for verifying a downloaded artifact

site/downloads/avatica-go.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: Avatica Go Client Downloads
permalink: /downloads/avatica-go.html
---

<!--
{% comment %}
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
The ASF licenses this file to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0
(the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
{% endcomment %}
-->

## Source releases

Release          | Date       | Commit   | Download
:--------------- | :--------- | :------- | :-------
{% for post in site.categories.release %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% if post.component != "avatica-go" %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% continue %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% endif %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% if post.fullVersion %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% assign v = post.fullVersion %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% else %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% capture v %}apache-calcite-avatica-go-{{ post.version }}{% endcapture %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% capture f %}apache-calcite-avatica-go-src-{{ post.version }}{% endcapture %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% endif %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% if forloop.index0 < 1 %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% capture p %}http://www.apache.org/dyn/closer.lua?filename=calcite/{{ v }}{% endcapture %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% assign q = "&action=download" %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% assign d = "https://www.apache.org/dist" %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% else %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% capture p %}http://archive.apache.org/dist/calcite/{{ v }}{% endcapture %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% assign q = "" %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% assign d = "https://archive.apache.org/dist" %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% endif %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% capture d1 %}{{ post.date | date: "%F"}}{% endcapture %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% capture d2 %}2017-05-01{% endcapture %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% capture d3 %}2018-03-01{% endcapture %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% capture d4 %}2018-06-01{% endcapture %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% capture d5 %}2018-09-11{% endcapture %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% if d1 > d3 %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% assign digest = "sha256" %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% elsif d1 > d2 %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% assign digest = "mds" %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% else %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% assign digest = "md5" %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% endif %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}<a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/docs/history.html#{{ post.tag }}">{{ post.version }}</a>{% comment %}
{% endcomment %} | {{ post.date | date_to_string }}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %} | <a href="https://github.com/apache/calcite-avatica-go/commit/{{ post.sha }}">{{ post.sha }}</a>{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% if d1 < d5 %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %} | <a href="{{ p }}/{{ f }}.tar.gz{{ q }}">tar</a>{% comment %}
{% endcomment %} (<a href="{{ d }}/calcite/{{ v }}/{{ f }}.tar.gz.{{ digest }}">{{ digest }}</a>{% comment %}
{% endcomment %} <a href="{{ d }}/calcite/{{ v }}/{{ f }}.tar.gz.asc">pgp</a>){% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% else %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %} | <a href="{{ p }}/{{ v }}-src.tar.gz{{ q }}">tar</a>{% comment %}
{% endcomment %} (<a href="{{ d }}/calcite/{{ v }}/{{ v }}-src.tar.gz.{{ digest }}">{{ digest }}</a>{% comment %}
{% endcomment %} <a href="{{ d }}/calcite/{{ v }}/{{ v }}-src.tar.gz.asc">pgp</a>){% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% endif %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% if d1 < d4 %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %} {% raw %}<br>{% endraw %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %} <a href="{{ p }}/{{ f }}.zip{{ q }}">zip</a>{% comment %}
{% endcomment %} (<a href="{{ d }}/calcite/{{ v }}/{{ f }}.zip.{{ digest }}">{{ digest }}</a>{% comment %}
{% endcomment %} <a href="{{ d }}/calcite/{{ v }}/{{ f }}.zip.asc">pgp</a>){% comment %}
{% endcomment %}{% endif %}{% comment %}
{% endcomment %}
{% endfor %}

Choose a source distribution in either *tar* or *zip* format.

For fast downloads, current source distributions are hosted on mirror servers;
older source distributions are in the
[archive](http://archive.apache.org/dist/calcite/).
If a download from a mirror fails, retry, and the second download will likely
succeed.

For security, hash and signature files are always hosted at
[Apache](https://www.apache.org/dist).

## Verify the integrity of the files

You must verify the integrity of the downloaded file using the PGP signature (.asc file) or a hash (.sha256, .md5 for older
releases). For more information why this must be done, please read [Verifying Apache Software Foundation Releases](https://www.apache.org/info/verification.html).

To verify the signature using GPG or PGP, please do the following:

1. Download the release artifact and the corresponding PGP signature from the table above.
2. Download the [Apache Calcite KEYS](http://www.apache.org/dist/calcite/KEYS) file.
3. Import the KEYS file and verify the downloaded artifact using one of the following methods:
{% highlight shell %}
% gpg --import KEYS
% gpg --verify downloaded_file.asc downloaded_file
{% endhighlight %}

or

{% highlight shell %}
% pgpk -a KEYS
% pgpv downloaded_file.asc
{% endhighlight %}

or

{% highlight shell %}
% pgp -ka KEYS
% pgp downloaded_file.asc
{% endhighlight %}
